README

Semantic Matrix
Version 1, July 25, 2023
Lars Hellan

This Matrix provides parameters for classifying verb meanings and verb senses, altogether with the aim of encompassing all verbs in a language. The present version addresses Norwegian.

The present version uses 24 parameters. 6 of these are mutually exclusive, with every verb selecting one of them, while the other 18 features can be seen as binary, although the positive versons, represented by the classificatory labels, in many cases can be seen as heading larger or smaller type hierarchies, not indicated here.

The following six features are mutually exclusiive:
Relative to a given state of a discourse universe, the meaning of the feature
'Sustain' is that the verb activity unfolds in harmony with the general state of the world. 
Relative to a given state of a discourse universe, the meaning of the feature
'Further' is that the verb activity provides a possibly new angle on the current states of affairs, or a new angle in the discourse. 
Relative to a given state of a discourse universe, the meaning of the feature
'Imped' is that the verb activity detracts from the harmony of the general states of affairs or discourse. 
Relative to a given state of a discourse universe, the meaning of the feature
'Prevent' is that the verb activity represents the end of the general states of affairs or discourse. 
The meaning of the feature 'Init' is that the verb activity represents the start of a general state of affairs or a new angle of discourse. 
The meaning of the feature 'PureRel' is that the meaning of the verb does not pertain to any specific state of affairs, but rather represents general relations. 

All the other features are mutually co-specificational:
The meaning of the feature 'Impact' is that the verb activity leaves an impact in the domain relevant to the activity.
The meaning of the feature 'Procedure' is that the verb activity is characterized by a certain procedural pattern.
The meaning of the feature 'Dir' is that the verb activity unfolds directionally.
The meaning of the feature 'Percept' is that the verb activity can be readily perceived.
The meaning of the feature 'Cogn' is that the verb activity requires cognitive attention.
The meaning of the feature 'Dependence' is that the verb activity presupposes or engenders certain structures of dependency.
The meaning of the feature 'Emotion' is that the verb activity presupposes or engenders aspects of emotion.
The meaning of the feature 'Creation' is that the verb activity has a creative contribution.
The meaning of the feature 'Response' is that the verb activity typically serves in response to a previous event or established state.
The meaning of the feature 'Unfold' is that the verb activity unfolds in time.
The meaning of the feature 'Perform' is that the verb activity is in some respect performed. As a particular type of performance, verbal performance is marked by the feature 'VerbalAct'.
The meaning of the feature 'Domin' is that the verb activity presupposes or engenders aspects of domination.
The meaning of the feature 'Poss' is that the verb activity presupposes or engenders aspects of possession.
The meaning of the feature 'Criterial' is that the verb activity carries criterial features such as postures, patterns, event sequences, etc. (called 'Posture' in the legend). They may be perceptual, thus representing a partial overlap with 'Percept'.
The meaning of the feature 'SymbVal' is that the verb activity includes items of symbolic function, such as sentential signs.
The meaning of the feature 'Loc' is that the verb activity is specified for location.
The meaning of the feature 'Phys-Bodily' is that the verb activity unfolds in a physical or bodily domain.



The system is currently tested for an inventory of 7400 verbs in Norwegian. The present, first, round of the enterprise comprises 2000 verbs, represented by those verbs which have the most syntactic valence frames - the number of frames in the present dsplay is indcated in the rightmost column, called 'n-frames'. 
An envisaged topic of investigaton is whether certain semantic features, or combinations thereof, are typical of verbs taking many valence frames, resp., few. Such contrasts will appear only at later rounds, when bi- and uni-valenced verbs are also included.
The present version is mainly for testing the general format, and for assessing whether 
- the features are well enough defined to sustain a robust classfication;
- further features would be desirable, at the level of generality;
- some features can be dispensed with.
